Cicuit Desgin : All logic gates are made-up of PMOS and NMOS transistors connected in very particuar fashion and once they are connected in that fashion ,
they perform required functionality of that particular respective gate. 
Spice Simulation: This particular Circuit has to be fed in with some waveforms to identify output charactristics and simulate using spice.
Simulated waveforms decides delays of particular cell. Based on value of delay, tune W and L ratio of particular transistor. 
W/L ratio is factor that decides the value of output current which eventually decides waveform shape, which decide delays of particular cell. 
To tune delay, how to tune W/L ration, is basically obtain using Spice simulation. 
Why do we need simulation? 
In physical design flow,  whatever we are doing in clock tree, timimg, crosstalk they are built on spice. 
If no SPICE, then there is no term delay. If no delay then clock tree, timimg , crosstalk doesn't make any sense. 
From where delay of cell comes from? 
To check Delay models are accurate? supply same input slew and output load in SPICE simulation and get delay value from SPICE and 
match it with delay table value. 
To verify static timing analysis is correct? delay values, slack values in STA are correct or not? 
Source of delay table comes from SPICE. 
Spice simulation involves characterisation of PMOS and NMOS transistors into details or any CMOS logic int odetails.

NMOS transistors and their characteristics. 

NMOS is n-channel Metal Oxide Semiconductor built on p-substrate 
It is a four terminal device.
It consists of a P-substrate body
It has 2 isolation regions, differentiating between two transistors. 
It has 2 n+ diffusion region is present near the SiO2 layer.
It has a Gate oxide layer
A Poly-Si (metal gate) layer is placed on top of the gate oxide layer and this form Gate terminal, which drive NMOS.
4 terminals mainly G - Gate, S - Source, D - Drain, B- Body or Bulk 
Terminal B in NMOS is grounded but important to understand threshold voltage charactersitics of NMOS. 


PMOS is just an inverted NMOS (p+ on n-substrate) but all other characteristics are common.
   
  
    
   
   
